===== PAGE 1 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility 
Infrastructure Platform
Institutional-grade implementation blueprint assuming full IBKR market-data and 
order-routing access
Prepared as an engineering roadmap for implementation by a junior developer without 
disclosing any strategy logic
Version 4.0
06 April 2026
Purpose. This document specifies the target architecture, data model, mathematical 
framework, implementation plan, quality controls, and operational runbooks 
required to build a reusable volatility infrastructure. It is intentionally strategy-
agnostic. It should enable a junior engineer to build the full data, pricing, surface, 
and risk stack while remaining blind to any downstream alpha logic.
Confidential engineering specification
===== PAGE 2 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Document overview
This document is written as a build manual rather than a research note. Every section is framed 
around implementation outcomes, interfaces, data contracts, acceptance criteria, and operational 
behavior. The intended reader is a junior developer who can code competently in Python but 
should not infer anything about the commercial intent of the system. For that reason, the 
document focuses on industrial primitives: market-data capture, canonical instrument master, 
forward reconstruction, implied-volatility inversion, surface construction, pricing, Greeks, 
scenario risk, persistence, orchestration, and observability.
The roadmap assumes access to Interactive Brokers Trader Workstation or IB Gateway, complete 
API entitlements for the relevant underlyings and option chains, and the right to store internally 
generated derived analytics. The system is designed so that raw market observations remain 
immutable, while all downstream analytics can be recomputed reproducibly from the raw layer. 
This separation is critical. It permits regression testing, deterministic restatement of historical 
analytics, and safe replacement of any one computation module without rewriting the rest of the 
stack.
Intended deliverables
• A production collector that discovers the tradable universe, subscribes to underlying and option 
market data, and stores every event with normalized timestamps.
• A canonical analytics layer that builds spot, forward, dividend/carry, implied volatility, surface 
parameters, model prices, and Greeks.
• A historical backfill and replay framework that can reconstruct entire days from snapshots or 
bars, then restate the derived analytics using the same code path as live processing.
• A scenario engine that calculates portfolio-level risk under spot, volatility, and time shocks, with 
configurable stress grids and clear attribution outputs.
• Operational runbooks, test plans, and handover notes so the system can be maintained by 
someone other than the original implementer.
What this document does not contain
• Any statement of the downstream trading strategy, position-selection logic, or portfolio-
construction rule.
• Any alpha signal, timing rule, trade expression template, or strategy-specific optimization 
objective.
• Any recommendation on directional views, tactical execution style, or risk appetite.
Sixteen-step roadmap at a glance
Step Workstream Primary output Acceptance test
1 Access, environments, 
and security
Running IBKR 
connectivity in dev 
and prod-like 
Gateway/TWS 
reachable, credentials 
stored safely, health 
===== PAGE 3 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
environments checks green
2 Instrument master Canonical master for 
underlyings, expiries, 
strikes, multipliers
Universe 
reproducible from 
configuration and API 
discovery
3 Market-data ingestion Raw quote/event 
store for underlyings 
and options
Loss-tolerant event 
capture with 
timestamp 
normalization
4 Persistent storage Immutable raw layer 
and curated analytics 
layer
Backfill and live runs 
write identical 
schemas
5 Spot builder Reliable spot or 
reference price series
Mid/last fallback logic 
works and edge cases 
are labeled
6 Forward and carry 
engine
Forward curve and 
implied 
carry/dividend curve
Parity-based forward 
stable across liquid 
strikes
7 Quote normalization 
and QC
Clean option quote set 
per maturity and 
strike
Illiquid or 
inconsistent quotes 
correctly filtered
8 Implied-volatility 
solver
Mid IV and model-
consistent diagnostic 
outputs
Convergence, bounds, 
and error states 
logged
9 Surface engine Interpolated surface 
and parameter 
snapshots
No obvious static 
arbitrage breaches 
after QC
10 Pricing engine European and 
American pricing 
services
Benchmark tests pass 
versus reference 
cases
11 Greeks and risk 
analytics
Per-contract and 
portfolio Greeks
Reconciles against 
finite-difference 
checks
12 Scenario engine Stress PnL and 
margin-style 
approximations
Worst-case loss 
reproducible under 
versioned scenarios
13 Historical 
reconstruction
Restated history of 
surfaces and risk 
Replay equals same-
code-path 
===== PAGE 4 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
metrics recomputation
14 Validation framework Automated QA, 
anomaly flags, audit 
trail
Daily QC report 
complete and 
actionable
15 Orchestration and 
observability
Schedulers, logs, 
dashboards, alerts
Failures detected 
quickly and restart 
cleanly
16 Production handover Docs, SOPs, support 
model, release 
checklist
Junior operator can 
run and support 
system
Part I — System architecture and engineering principles
Architecture principles
Determinism
Given the same raw observations, configuration version, and code version, the system must 
reproduce identical derived analytics. Reproducibility is a non-negotiable property because all 
later QA depends on it.
Layer separation
Split the stack into five layers: connectivity, raw capture, normalized market state, derived 
analytics, and portfolio/risk analytics. No downstream layer may silently overwrite an upstream 
observation.
Idempotent processing
All batch jobs must be restartable. If a job is re-run for a given date partition, the outcome must 
either be byte-for-byte identical or intentionally versioned as a new analytics release.
Transparency
Every computed object must carry provenance: source timestamps, calculation timestamp, code 
version, config hash, and the source records used to compute it.
Operational simplicity
Prefer a simpler implementation that is inspectable and testable over an academically elegant 
one that is fragile in production. Reliability outranks sophistication.
Target component model
Connectivity service
A thin service responsible for establishing and maintaining IBKR sessions, authenticating to TWS 
or IB Gateway, and exposing a stable internal event stream. It must own reconnect logic, pacing-
awareness, and heartbeat monitoring.
===== PAGE 5 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Universe service
A scheduled service that discovers instruments, resolves contract identifiers, validates 
expiries/strikes/multipliers, and materializes the canonical option universe to storage.
Collector service
A streaming or polling service that subscribes to underlyings and options, receives ticks and 
computations, stamps them with normalized timestamps, and writes them to the raw layer.
Analytics service
A stateless computation layer that consumes normalized market states and emits forward curves, 
implied volatilities, surface snapshots, model prices, and Greeks.
Portfolio/risk service
A service that merges positions with analytics snapshots, calculates sensitivities and scenario 
PnL, and publishes both intraday and end-of-day reports.
Control plane
The job scheduler, configuration repository, logging, metrics collection, release registry, and 
runbooks that allow the whole system to be operated as a product rather than a loose script 
collection.
Recommended deployment layout
A practical first implementation uses one repository, one shared configuration package, one 
relational metadata store, and one object store or partitioned file store for raw and derived 
datasets. The live collector should run continuously. The analytics and risk layers should run both 
incrementally intraday and as an end-of-day reconciliation batch. Keep the connectivity process 
separate from the analytics process. If the IBKR session drops, the collector can restart without 
invalidating the analytics layer or corrupting state.
Core naming conventions
• Use a stable composite instrument key: underlying symbol, security type, exchange, expiry, strike, 
option right, multiplier, currency, and the broker-specific contract identifier.
• Distinguish raw timestamps from normalized timestamps. For example: exchange_ts, receipt_ts, 
and canonical_ts.
• Version every configuration set: universe version, QC threshold version, solver version, and 
scenario-grid version.
• Use explicit maturity notation in years for all analytics, but store the original expiry date and the 
day-count convention used to convert dates into year fractions.
Part II — Mathematical framework
The volatility stack must use a consistent mathematical representation from raw quotes through 
risk reporting. The point is not to impose one academic model on every problem; the point is to 
make sure every module speaks the same language. The underlying reference should be a clean 
===== PAGE 6 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
spot or reference price, each maturity should have a reconstructed forward, the quote set should 
be transformed into log-moneyness, and the surface should usually be represented in total 
variance rather than raw volatility whenever interpolation is required.
Reference spot and market state
For each underlying, define a reference price at time t. In liquid hours, the default should be the 
mid-price of the live bid and ask. Outside liquid hours or when the spread is abnormally wide, 
the module should fall back to an explicitly labeled alternative such as last trade, official close, or 
a carry-forward from the most recent trusted snapshot. Never hide a fallback. The chosen 
reference type must be stored as a field because downstream diagnostics often need to know 
whether a surface was built on a live mid or a fallback reference.
Equation 1. Mid-based reference spot
A market state snapshot is the smallest coherent state used by downstream analytics. It should 
contain at minimum: the underlying reference price; underlying bid, ask, last, and volume 
context; every eligible option bid, ask, last, size, open interest, and the broker-returned model 
computation fields if available; plus metadata such as trading session status, timestamps, and 
data-source health flags.
Forward reconstruction and carry
For an option maturity T, the system must infer a forward price F(T). On equities and equity 
indexes, the forward embeds rates and expected carry or dividends. The preferred practical 
method is parity reconstruction from liquid call-put pairs because it avoids relying on a separate 
dividend feed in the first build. In parallel, the system may maintain a rate curve and derive an 
implied carry or dividend yield for diagnostic use. The parity forward should be estimated from 
several near-the-money strikes and combined with liquidity-aware weights rather than from a 
single pair.
Equation 2. Put-call parity forward estimate
Equation 3. Carry-based forward identity

===== PAGE 7 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Equation 4. Weighted aggregation of parity forwards
Equation 5. Implied carry or dividend yield from spot and forward
The junior developer should implement both a point estimate and a diagnostics bundle. The 
diagnostics bundle must include the list of strikes used, call and put mids, weight per strike, 
parity residual per strike, the chosen forward, and a quality label. This is necessary because 
forward errors contaminate every later quantity: moneyness, IV, surface shape, deltas, and 
scenario PnL.
Log-moneyness and total variance
Quotes should be mapped into log-moneyness relative to forward, not spot. This is more stable 
across maturities and aligns naturally with total-variance parameterizations. For each accepted 
option quote, compute k = ln(K/F(T)). Also compute total variance w = sigma^2 T. Interpolate and 
smooth in total variance space whenever possible. A surface represented as total variance is 
usually easier to compare across maturities and easier to constrain for basic static arbitrage 
conditions.
Equation 6. Log-moneyness
Equation 7. Total variance
European pricing identities
European options should be priced using a forward-consistent form of Black-Scholes/Black-76. 
The implementation should expose both direct price functions and inverse functions that solve 
for implied volatility from a market price. The solver must be robust to deep in-the-money, deep 
out-of-the-money, short-dated, and stale-quote edge cases. It must expose convergence status, 
number of iterations, lower and upper bounds used, and the final residual.
Equation 8. Black-Scholes d1
Equation 9. Black-Scholes d2
===== PAGE 8 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Equation 10. European call price
Equation 11. European put price
American pricing identities
For single-name equity options that can be exercised early, the first production version should 
expose a lattice-based pricer and may optionally add a closed-form approximation such as 
Bjerksund-Stensland for speed. The implementation target is not novelty but stable, testable 
behavior. The developer must document which pricer is used where, what carry assumptions are 
passed in, and how the early-exercise check is implemented. The pricer must also be 
benchmarked against degenerate cases where the American price should converge to the 
European price.
Equation 12. Backward induction for an American-option tree
Greeks and risk identities
All first-order and second-order sensitivities should be computed in a unified unit system. Delta 
and gamma should be defined with respect to the underlying reference price; vega should be 
defined per absolute volatility point or per unit volatility depending on the code convention, but 
the convention must be explicit and consistent. For portfolio and desk reporting, also compute 
monetized Greeks such as dollar gamma and dollar vega.
Equation 13. Delta
Equation 14. Gamma
Equation 15. Vega
===== PAGE 9 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Equation 16. Theta
Equation 17. Dollar gamma
Equation 18. Dollar vega
Equation 19. Local PnL approximation from Greeks
Surface parameterization and no-arbitrage diagnostics
The volatility surface module should support at least one parameterized representation and one 
nonparametric fallback. A practical parameterized choice is SVI by maturity slice. The fallback 
can be a spline or monotone interpolation in total variance space after stringent QC. The goal is 
not to force one model everywhere, but to produce a stable, interrogable surface. The system 
should test at minimum for obvious calendar inconsistencies and for gross cross-strike 
pathologies. Advanced no-arbitrage enforcement can be added in later releases, but basic 
diagnostics must be present from day one.
Equation 20. SVI slice parameterization
Equation 21. Basic calendar monotonicity condition
Equation 22. Variance interpolation across maturities
Index or basket variance identity
The infrastructure may need to compute basket-level or index-level variance identities for 
generic correlation diagnostics. The system should therefore include a generic implementation of 
===== PAGE 10 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
the weighted variance identity. This is not strategy logic; it is a reusable risk and diagnostics 
primitive. The module must accept a vector of weights, constituent volatilities, and optional 
pairwise correlations or a simplifying average-correlation assumption, then return the implied 
basket variance and residual metrics.
Equation 23. Generic basket variance identity
Part III — Sixteen-step implementation roadmap
This part is the core delivery. Each step contains a practical objective, a task list, expected 
outputs, acceptance tests, and implementation notes. The steps are ordered deliberately. A junior 
developer should not skip ahead. Later stages depend on decisions made and artifacts created 
earlier. If a later step appears blocked, the correct remedy is usually to strengthen the preceding 
step rather than to patch around the problem.
Step 1 — Access, environments, and security
Objective
Create a safe, repeatable foundation for all later work. The junior developer must set up a 
development environment, a production-like environment, and a configuration/secret 
management pattern before writing any analytics code. A common failure mode in early trading 
infrastructure is to mix credentials, hand-edited notebooks, and ad hoc scripts. This step 
eliminates that risk by imposing structure from the beginning.
Detailed tasks
(a) Install Python and package management tooling; pin versions; produce a reproducible lock 
file. (b) Stand up TWS or, preferably for unattended operation, IB Gateway in an isolated user 
account. (c) Configure an application-level client ID convention so multiple services do not collide. 
(d) Build secret loading via environment variables or a secret manager, never via hard-coded 
strings. (e) Create configuration files for exchanges, instruments, calendars, and QC thresholds. (f) 
Add basic health checks: API reachable, login valid, market-data entitlement present, and clock 
synchronization within tolerance. (g) Decide and document where logs and artifacts will be 
written in each environment.
Outputs
A reproducible Python environment, a running IBKR session reachable from code, a 
configuration package under version control, and a bootstrap script that proves end-to-end 
connectivity without placing orders. The bootstrap script should print the session state, current 
time, contract resolution result for one underlying, and one market-data retrieval example.
===== PAGE 11 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Acceptance criteria
A new machine can be provisioned from documentation; the bootstrap script succeeds; secrets 
are not stored in the repository; all environment-specific values are loaded through documented 
configuration; and a simple connectivity job can be run from the scheduler without manual 
intervention.
Junior implementation notes
Start with the smallest useful smoke test. Resolve one contract, request one quote, and write one 
JSON line to disk. Once that succeeds reliably, only then add complexity. Keep a markdown 
runbook called environment.md updated as you go. Every manual step performed during setup 
must be documented immediately, otherwise the environment will become impossible to 
reproduce.
Step 2 — Instrument master and universe discovery
Objective
Build the canonical instrument master that every other service will use. The instrument master is 
the single source of truth for underlyings, option contracts, multipliers, currencies, exchanges, 
and expiries. Without this layer, analytics become brittle because the same real-world contract 
may be represented by inconsistent ad hoc identifiers across scripts.
Detailed tasks
(a) Define the canonical schema for underlying instruments and option instruments. (b) 
Implement contract-resolution helpers that map human-readable requests into broker contract 
identifiers. (c) Use the option-chain discovery APIs to obtain expiries, strikes, trading class, and 
multiplier information. (d) Normalize expiries into a consistent date format and strikes into 
numeric values. (e) Persist both the raw broker response and the normalized canonical 
representation. (f) Add data-quality checks for duplicate contracts, impossible multipliers, or 
missing fields. (g) Version the discovered universe by date and configuration so the same trading 
day can always be reconstructed.
Outputs
A canonical instrument master table plus helper methods: get_underlying(symbol), 
get_option_chain(symbol, date), resolve_contract(key), and load_active_universe(session_date). 
The table should support filtering by exchange, product type, maturity window, and listing status.
Acceptance criteria
Given a configured underlying, the system can reproduce the same active option universe on 
repeated runs; duplicates are removed deterministically; multiplier and currency are always 
populated; and any unresolved contract is surfaced as an explicit exception with diagnostics 
rather than silently skipped.
===== PAGE 12 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Junior implementation notes
Treat the broker's contract identifier as an external foreign key, not as your only identifier. Your 
canonical key must remain meaningful even if the broker session changes. Store raw contract 
payloads as evidence. Future debugging often depends on seeing exactly what the broker 
returned at discovery time.
Step 3 — Market-data ingestion layer
Objective
Capture raw underlying and option observations in a way that is robust to disconnects, pacing 
issues, and intermittent field availability. The raw layer is the evidentiary record of what the 
system saw. It must be append-only and loss-aware. If data is missing, that fact must be recorded 
rather than papered over.
Detailed tasks
(a) Decide which subscriptions are persistent streaming subscriptions and which are snapshots. 
(b) Create a collector process for underlying quotes and another for options, or a unified collector 
with explicit partitioning. (c) Normalize incoming ticks into a common event structure with 
instrument key, field name, value, source timestamp if available, receipt timestamp, and collector 
timestamp. (d) Persist every event to the raw layer with a session identifier. (e) Add reconnect 
logic with backoff and heartbeat monitoring. (f) Detect market-data pacing or entitlement failures 
and log them as structured events. (g) Build daily collector summaries: event counts, missing 
intervals, reconnect count, and coverage ratios.
Outputs
An append-only raw event store, a collector service process, health metrics, and a session 
summary report. The collector should emit enough metadata to reconstruct whether a 
downstream analytic used a fresh or stale observation.
Acceptance criteria
The collector can run for an entire session without manual supervision; disconnects produce 
warnings and controlled recovery; a synthetic kill-and-restart test does not corrupt the raw store; 
and at least one day of data can be replayed from disk without reaching back to the broker.
Junior implementation notes
Never compute analytics inside the collector callback itself. The callback should only normalize, 
stamp, and persist. Heavy logic inside the callback is the fastest path to dropped events and 
undebuggable behavior.
===== PAGE 13 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Step 4 — Persistent storage and data model
Objective
Define durable storage for immutable raw data and curated analytics. The storage design must 
support both live incremental writes and historical backfills. The same schemas should be used in 
both cases so that replay and live computation share code rather than diverge.
Detailed tasks
(a) Choose a metadata store for configuration, jobs, and reference entities. (b) Choose a columnar 
partitioned store for large raw and derived datasets. (c) Design partitioning by trade date, 
underlying, and data layer. (d) Create schema definitions for raw events, normalized market-state 
snapshots, forwards, implied-vol points, surface parameters, model prices, Greeks, scenarios, 
positions, and QC results. (e) Enforce schema evolution rules and backfill compatibility. (f) Decide 
retention policy for raw tick/event data, normalized snapshots, and derived analytics. (g) Add 
write-ahead validation so malformed records are rejected early with explicit logs.
Outputs
Versioned schemas, migration scripts, partitioned datasets, and a documented data lineage from 
raw events through curated analytics. The system should be able to answer the question 'which 
raw records produced this surface snapshot?' within one query or one notebook cell.
Acceptance criteria
All required tables exist; partitioning supports efficient daily queries; replay and live writes land 
in identical schemas; and deleting/recomputing one derived partition does not require rewriting 
the raw layer.
Junior implementation notes
Use simple, explicit schemas. Avoid storing nested structures unless they materially reduce 
complexity. A junior developer should favor readability and debuggability over compact 
cleverness. Do not mix timestamps in different time zones in the same field.
Step 5 — Spot builder and market-state snapshots
Objective
Transform raw ticks into coherent market-state snapshots for each underlying and each option 
chain. Snapshots are the deterministic inputs to all downstream analytics. They must be time-
aligned, quality-labeled, and reproducible from raw events.
Detailed tasks
(a) Define the snapshot frequency or trigger, for example every N seconds, every material update, 
or on demand. (b) For each snapshot, compute reference spot using mid-price when reliable and 
documented fallbacks when not. (c) Store bid, ask, last, spread percentage, and the chosen 
reference-type flag. (d) Join options into the same snapshot with the most recent eligible quote 
not older than a configurable age threshold. (e) Add market-state flags such as open/closed, stale 
===== PAGE 14 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
underlying, stale option, or fallback spot. (f) Build snapshot completeness metrics per underlying 
and maturity.
Outputs
A normalized market-state dataset keyed by timestamp, underlying, and option contract, 
including all fields required by the pricing and surface layers.
Acceptance criteria
Given the same raw events and the same snapshot parameters, repeated runs produce identical 
market-state rows. Stale-option logic is visible in flags. Spot fallbacks are labeled, not hidden. Spot 
diagnostics are queryable by day and time.
Junior implementation notes
Keep the snapshot builder pure: raw events in, snapshots out. Do not call external services from 
inside it. That purity makes it easy to replay past sessions and to unit-test the builder with 
synthetic event streams.
Step 6 — Forward and implied carry engine
Objective
Compute a robust forward for each maturity and derive an implied carry or dividend diagnostic 
curve. This engine is foundational because it determines the moneyness coordinate used by the 
implied-volatility and surface modules.
Detailed tasks
(a) For each maturity, identify eligible call-put pairs near the money. (b) Compute call and put 
mids, then parity forward per strike. (c) Weight forward candidates by liquidity and quote 
quality. (d) Remove outliers using robust statistics such as median absolute deviation or parity 
residual thresholds. (e) Fit or smooth the forward term structure across maturities. (f) If a rate 
curve is available, derive implied carry/dividend yield and compare it with expectations. (g) 
Persist both the chosen forward and all diagnostics used to choose it.
Outputs
A forward curve dataset by underlying and maturity plus a diagnostics dataset listing candidate 
strikes, weights, residuals, and quality labels.
Acceptance criteria
The forward is stable across small perturbations in the eligible strike set; outlier pairs do not 
dominate the estimate; diagnostics can explain why a maturity was flagged poor quality; and the 
forward term structure behaves sensibly across adjacent maturities unless explicitly flagged as 
unreliable.
===== PAGE 15 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Junior implementation notes
Debug the forward engine first on a handful of liquid maturities before scaling to the whole 
chain. When a maturity fails, inspect the raw quotes rather than trying to tune the smoother 
blindly. In practice, most forward errors originate in quote quality, not in the formula.
Step 7 — Quote normalization and quality control
Objective
Establish a defensible process for deciding which option quotes may enter the solver and surface 
layers. The point is not to maximize quote count; the point is to maximize the number of quotes 
that are economically meaningful and consistent with a tradable state.
Detailed tasks
(a) Compute standard quote-quality features: spread percentage, bid positivity, quote age, open 
interest, volume, and monotonicity hints. (b) Mark quotes as usable, caution, or reject. (c) Detect 
crossed or locked markets, impossible prices relative to intrinsic value, and stale last prices. (d) 
Apply robust outlier statistics to parity residuals or preliminary implied volatilities. (e) Store the 
reason code for each rejected quote. (f) Keep both the full raw snapshot and the filtered snapshot 
so QC decisions are auditable.
Outputs
A filtered quote set ready for inversion plus a QC table explaining every rejection or downgrade.
Acceptance criteria
The same quote is either consistently accepted or rejected under a fixed threshold version. QC 
reason codes are exhaustive and mutually understandable. The filtered chain retains enough 
points for a stable surface while removing obvious garbage.
Junior implementation notes
Do not implement QC as a monolithic if-statement. Break it into named checks and log each check 
separately. This makes threshold tuning and postmortem analysis far easier.
===== PAGE 16 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Step 8 — Implied-volatility inversion engine
Objective
Convert filtered option prices into implied volatilities using robust numerical methods. The 
engine must support diagnostics, error handling, and deterministic behavior. Every solved IV 
should be accompanied by enough metadata to understand how reliable it is.
Detailed tasks
(a) Implement European inversion using a bracketed root solver for products where Black-style 
pricing is appropriate. (b) For American options, either invert through the chosen American 
pricer or compute a proxy IV under a documented convention. (c) Use intrinsic-value and no-
arbitrage bounds to detect unsolvable inputs. (d) Record convergence status, iteration count, final 
residual, lower and upper bracket, and the pricing model used. (e) Expose fallback behavior for 
short-dated or near-intrinsic cases. (f) Build a batch interface that can solve an entire chain 
efficiently.
Outputs
A table of implied-vol points with coordinates in strike, moneyness, maturity, delta if available, 
and extensive diagnostics.
Acceptance criteria
Most liquid quotes converge cleanly; pathological cases are explicitly labeled; the solver passes 
reference examples; and finite perturbations in input price produce plausible IV changes rather 
than numerical explosions.
Junior implementation notes
Write the scalar solver first, then the vectorized batch wrapper. Keep the scalar path readable 
and test it thoroughly. Most production bugs are easiest to find in the scalar implementation 
before optimization layers are added.
Step 9 — Surface engine and parameter storage
Objective
Build volatility surfaces by maturity and across maturities, while keeping the raw solved points 
and the final fitted representation separate. The surface module should produce both a machine-
friendly fitted form and a human-debuggable diagnostics package.
===== PAGE 17 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Detailed tasks
(a) Group implied-vol points by maturity. (b) Transform points into log-moneyness and total 
variance. (c) Fit the chosen parameterization slice by slice or apply the chosen nonparametric 
smoothing method. (d) Interpolate across maturities in variance space. (e) Compute goodness-of-
fit metrics and no-arbitrage diagnostics. (f) Save both fitted parameters and reconstructed grid 
values. (g) Store rejected points and fit warnings so operators can see whether a smooth surface 
was built on very sparse input.
Outputs
Surface parameter tables, a regularized surface grid, fit diagnostics, and quality flags by maturity 
and by underlying.
Acceptance criteria
The fitted surface reproduces accepted market points within tolerance, diagnostics reveal sparse 
or poor-quality fits, and repeated runs under the same inputs return the same parameters. At 
least one plotting utility can visualize the raw points versus fitted slices for operator review.
Junior implementation notes
Never discard the raw solved points after the fit. Operators must be able to compare the fitted 
surface with the exact points that entered the calibration. This is essential for debugging 
suspicious Greeks or scenario outputs later.
Step 10 — Pricing engine
Objective
Provide reusable pricing services for both European and American options. The pricing engine is 
the only module allowed to translate a state vector (spot, forward, maturity, volatility, carry 
parameters) into price and Greeks. Centralizing this logic prevents drift across notebooks and 
services.
Detailed tasks
(a) Implement a European pricer consistent with the inversion engine. (b) Implement an 
American pricer suitable for single-name use. (c) Expose first-order and second-order Greeks, 
either analytically when available or numerically with documented finite-difference settings. (d) 
Create a clean Python API that accepts a typed input object and returns a typed result object. (e) 
Add benchmark tests and performance tests. (f) Document unit conventions rigorously.
Outputs
A pricing package with scalar and vectorized interfaces, complete docstrings, examples, and 
benchmark fixtures.
===== PAGE 18 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Acceptance criteria
Reference cases match expected values; the European and American engines agree in regimes 
where they should; unit tests cover sign conventions and limiting cases; and the API is stable 
enough to be imported by analytics, risk, and scenario modules without special casing.
Junior implementation notes
Avoid embedding pricing logic directly in dataframes or notebooks. Keep the pricer a clean 
library with tests. The clearer this boundary is, the safer later refactors become.
Step 11 — Greeks and per-position risk analytics
Objective
Turn the pricing layer into a per-contract and per-position risk service. The output of this step 
should be the canonical risk snapshot used everywhere else in the system, including scenario 
analysis and operational dashboards.
Detailed tasks
(a) Define the sensitivity set required at instrument level and at portfolio level. (b) Pull in the 
latest positions or hypothetical positions from the source of record. (c) Join positions to analytics 
snapshots and compute per-line price, Greeks, and monetized sensitivities. (d) Aggregate by 
instrument, maturity, underlying, and any desk-defined grouping keys. (e) Compute 
reconciliation checks against broker-returned Greeks if available. (f) Publish both line-level and 
aggregate outputs.
Outputs
Position-level risk tables, aggregated risk tables, and reconciliation reports.
Acceptance criteria
The same positions on the same analytics snapshot always produce the same aggregate risk; 
dollar gamma and dollar vega conventions are documented and stable; and reconciliation 
discrepancies beyond threshold are surfaced automatically.
Junior implementation notes
Store both contract-level and aggregate outputs. Aggregates are convenient, but debugging always 
starts at the line level. If a total Greek looks wrong and the line-level breakdown is missing, the 
system becomes opaque immediately.

===== PAGE 19 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Step 12 — Scenario engine and margin-style diagnostics
Objective
Build a scenario framework that approximates worst-case losses under configured spot, volatility, 
and time shocks. The purpose is generic risk control, capacity planning, and margin-style 
diagnostics. It should not encode any strategy logic.
Detailed tasks
(a) Define versioned scenario grids: spot up/down moves, volatility shifts, curve rotations if 
required, and time roll-down. (b) Reprice the full portfolio under every scenario. (c) Attribute PnL 
by line, underlying, and scenario family. (d) Compute worst-case loss, top contributors, and 
pathwise diagnostics. (e) Support both full repricing and local Greeks-based approximations for 
speed, while keeping the full repricing as the reference. (f) Persist the exact scenario set used for 
every report.
Outputs
Scenario result tables, worst-case summaries, and margin-style approximation reports.
Acceptance criteria
A report can be regenerated exactly given the positions, analytics snapshot, and scenario version. 
Worst-case contributors are explainable. Repricing and Greeks approximations agree within 
documented limits for small shocks.
Junior implementation notes
Version the scenario grid. Do not leave it as a mutable notebook cell. The scenario definition is 
part of the data lineage and must be queryable alongside the output.
Step 13 — Historical reconstruction and replay
Objective
Enable the system to reconstruct historical analytics from stored raw data or historical snapshots 
using the same code path as live analytics. This step turns the infrastructure from a live monitor 
into a real research and audit platform.
Detailed tasks
(a) Define how a historical day is replayed: from raw events into snapshots, from snapshots into 
forwards and surfaces, and from surfaces into risk. (b) Ensure all derived jobs can run in batch 
mode over a date range. (c) Detect missing raw partitions and create partial-data flags. (d) Store 
restated outputs in versioned partitions so newer code versions do not silently overwrite older 
historical analytics. (e) Compare replay outputs with live outputs for overlapping periods.
===== PAGE 20 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Outputs
Replay scripts, backfill jobs, replay QA reports, and a historical archive of derived analytics.
Acceptance criteria
At least one historical month can be reconstructed end to end. Replay and live outputs align on 
overlapping dates when using the same code version. Missing data is flagged rather than masked 
by interpolation without notice.
Junior implementation notes
The replay code path should call the same libraries as live processing. Resist the temptation to 
fork a separate 'historical only' implementation. Dual code paths always drift and become 
inconsistent.
Step 14 — Validation framework and anomaly detection
Objective
Create the automated controls that determine whether each daily analytics run is trustworthy. 
Validation must be treated as a product, not as a last-minute dashboard. The framework should 
produce actionable flags instead of vague 'data looked weird' statements.
Detailed tasks
(a) Define validation checks for coverage, stale-data rates, forward stability, solver convergence, 
surface smoothness, no-arbitrage diagnostics, and reconciliation deltas. (b) Build daily reports 
summarizing pass/warn/fail outcomes. (c) Add anomaly detection against rolling baselines for key 
metrics such as quote counts, forward residuals, fit errors, and scenario losses. (d) Write every 
failed record to a triage table with enough context to investigate. (e) Define escalation thresholds 
and who gets notified.
Outputs
QC reports, anomaly tables, a validation dashboard, and triage views for failed instruments or 
maturities.
Acceptance criteria
A daily operator can identify the failing underlyings or maturities within minutes. Every failed 
validation has a reason code and supporting context. Historical trends of QC metrics are visible 
for regression monitoring.
Junior implementation notes
A good validation framework is specific. Avoid generic red banners. Operators need to know 
which maturity failed, which quote count collapsed, which solver residual blew out, and where to 
look next.
===== PAGE 21 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Step 15 — Orchestration, logging, and observability
Objective
Turn the build into an operable system with schedules, retries, metrics, and alerting. A correct 
algorithm that cannot be monitored is not production-ready.
Detailed tasks
(a) Define jobs for universe refresh, live collection, incremental analytics, end-of-day 
reconciliation, replay, and QC. (b) Add structured logging with correlation IDs linking collector 
sessions to analytics jobs. (c) Expose metrics such as event rates, stale ratios, forward failures, 
solver failure counts, and scenario run times. (d) Create alerts for collector death, missing 
partitions, elevated failure rates, and QC fails. (e) Implement restart procedures that do not 
duplicate or corrupt records. (f) Build simple dashboards that show system health and latest 
analytics coverage.
Outputs
Scheduled jobs, logs, dashboards, and alert routes.
Acceptance criteria
A simulated failure of the collector or analytics service is detected within a documented interval. 
Restarting a failed job does not silently duplicate outputs. Operators can identify the last healthy 
run and current backlog instantly.
Junior implementation notes
Prefer fewer well-labeled metrics over many opaque ones. An operator should be able to answer: 
Is data flowing? Are surfaces building? Are QC checks passing? Are scenario reports current? 
Start there and expand only if needed.
Step 16 — Production hardening, documentation, and handover
Objective
Finish the infrastructure as a maintainable product. The last step is not code; it is ensuring that 
another person can operate, support, and extend the platform without reverse-engineering it.
Detailed tasks
(a) Freeze interface contracts and publish them in documentation. (b) Create onboarding notes, 
runbooks, deployment instructions, and a release checklist. (c) Record known limitations and 
future enhancements. (d) Add ownership and support expectations. (e) Define change-
management rules for schema changes, threshold changes, and model changes. (f) Conduct a 
handover walkthrough where the junior engineer demonstrates operation from environment 
setup through QC interpretation.
Outputs
A maintained documentation set, a release checklist, SOPs, and a support model.
===== PAGE 22 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Acceptance criteria
A new engineer can set up the environment, run a connectivity smoke test, trigger a replay, read 
the QC report, and explain where to investigate a failed surface build without support from the 
original author.
Junior implementation notes
Documentation is not an afterthought. Treat it like code. Every module should have a README, 
every public function should have docstrings, and every recurring operational procedure should 
exist as a runbook with concrete commands and screenshots where useful.
Part IV — Detailed implementation guides
A. Python repository structure
A junior developer should not begin with a flat directory of scripts. The repository should be 
organized around stable packages and clear ownership boundaries. One recommended structure 
is shown below. The exact names may vary, but the separation of concerns should remain.
• repo_root/
•   configs/                  # environment files, thresholds, calendars, scenario grids
•   docs/                     # runbooks, module READMEs, architecture diagrams
•   src/
•     connectivity/           # IBKR session management, reconnect logic, heartbeats
•     universe/               # contract resolution, option-chain discovery, master tables
•     collectors/             # raw event capture, polling/stream adapters
•     snapshots/              # normalized market-state builders
•     forwards/               # parity forward engine, carry diagnostics
•     iv/                     # pricing inversion and diagnostics
•     surfaces/               # fitters, interpolation, no-arb checks
•     pricing/                # European and American pricers
•     risk/                   # Greeks, aggregation, scenarios
•     storage/                # schema definitions, read/write adapters
•     orchestration/          # job entry points, scheduler wrappers
•     qc/                     # validation checks and anomaly detection
•     utils/                  # dates, calendars, math helpers, logging helpers
•   tests/                    # unit tests, integration tests, regression fixtures
===== PAGE 23 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
•   notebooks/                # strictly exploratory; never source-of-truth code
•   scripts/                  # operational wrappers for CLI entry points
Coding standards
• Every module must expose typed functions or dataclasses for inputs and outputs.
• Do not pass loose pandas rows between modules as implicit contracts. Define explicit objects.
• Separate pure calculations from I/O. Pure functions are easier to test and to replay historically.
• Any function with hidden defaults affecting economics must document those defaults in the 
docstring.
• Every public module should contain one worked example that a junior engineer can run.
B. IBKR integration map
The system should isolate broker-specific behavior behind a thin adapter. This makes the rest of 
the stack easier to test and protects the analytics layer from session-management details. The 
adapter should expose methods such as connect, disconnect, resolve_contract, 
request_option_chain, subscribe_market_data, cancel_market_data, and request_historical_bars. 
It should transform broker callbacks into normalized internal events.
Need IBKR-facing capability Normalized output Notes
Session management connect / heartbeat / 
reconnect
session_state events Own backoff and 
retry behavior in one 
place
Universe discovery option-chain 
resolution and 
contract lookup
canonical instrument 
rows
Persist raw payloads 
for audit
Live market data underlying and 
option quote 
subscriptions
raw quote events Keep callbacks 
lightweight
Historical retrieval bars or snapshots for 
replay/bootstrap
historical raw 
partitions
Use same schemas as 
live where possible
Broker computations option computation 
fields if available
diagnostic quote 
features
Never rely exclusively 
on broker analytics
Practical adapter pattern
Implement an adapter class that owns the broker connection and converts all callbacks into 
internal events. The rest of the codebase should never import broker callback enums directly. It 
should consume a broker-agnostic event stream. This pattern pays off immediately when writing 
replay tests because the replay source can emit the same internal event objects as the live 
adapter.
===== PAGE 24 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
C. Data schemas and table contracts
The platform should maintain a small number of carefully designed tables rather than a sprawl 
of one-off datasets. The tables below are the minimum recommended schema families.
Table family Purpose Required primary keys
instrument_master Canonical underlyings and 
option contracts
instrument_key, as_of_date
raw_market_events Immutable tick/field 
observations
session_id, event_id
market_state_snapshots Time-aligned inputs to 
analytics
snapshot_ts, instrument_key
forward_curve Forward and implied carry 
diagnostics
snapshot_ts, underlying, 
maturity
iv_points Solved implied-volatility 
observations
snapshot_ts, contract_key
surface_parameters Model parameters by slice or 
global fit
snapshot_ts, underlying, 
maturity, model_version
surface_grid Regularized grid values for 
use by other services
snapshot_ts, underlying, 
maturity, moneyness_bucket
pricing_results Model price and Greeks by 
contract
snapshot_ts, contract_key, 
pricer_version
positions Source-of-record positions or 
hypothetical positions
valuation_ts, portfolio_id, 
contract_key
risk_aggregates Grouped risk outputs valuation_ts, portfolio_id, 
group_key
scenario_results Stress PnL outputs valuation_ts, portfolio_id, 
scenario_id, contract_key
qc_results Validation outcomes and 
diagnostics
run_id, check_name, 
target_key
Schema design rules
• Never store decimals as formatted strings. Use numeric types and explicit scales.
• Keep version fields on all derived analytics tables.
• Store timezone-aware timestamps or store UTC plus a clear convention; do not mix local and UTC 
ambiguously.
• Every derived table should reference the source snapshot_ts used to compute it.
• QC results must point to both the failing object and the run that produced the failure.
===== PAGE 25 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
D. Detailed quality-control checklist
The QC layer should be formalized as a library of named checks. Each check returns a status, a 
severity, the measured value, the threshold version applied, and a payload of context fields. The 
checks below should exist at minimum in the first production release.
• Collector continuity: no unexplained gap longer than N seconds during liquid session.
• Underlying quote health: spread percentage and staleness below configured thresholds.
• Option chain coverage: minimum count of eligible calls and puts per monitored maturity.
• Forward stability: weighted forward estimate within tolerance of the median candidate.
• Parity residual: per-strike residuals below threshold for the accepted set.
• IV solver convergence: convergence ratio above threshold and residual distribution acceptable.
• Surface fit error: root-mean-square fit error within threshold by maturity.
• Calendar sanity: total variance should not move backwards across neighboring maturities without 
a fail flag.
• Greek sanity: finite-difference and analytic Greeks agree within tolerance on test contracts.
• Scenario completeness: all configured scenarios executed and stored with no missing results.
Robust outlier metrics
For several QC checks, robust statistics are preferable to means and standard deviations. For 
example, forward candidates and preliminary IV points often contain a few bad quotes. Median-
based statistics resist contamination better and are easier to explain in ops reviews.
Equation 24. Robust z-score using median absolute deviation
E. Testing strategy
The platform requires four layers of tests. First, unit tests for pure math and data-transformation 
functions. Second, integration tests for the broker adapter using mocks or recorded event 
streams. Third, regression tests using archived market-state snapshots and expected outputs. 
Fourth, operational tests that verify scheduler entry points, logging, and basic health-check 
behavior.
• Unit tests: pricing identities, inversion convergence, parity calculations, date-count logic, and 
scenario aggregation.
• Integration tests: event normalization, contract resolution, quote subscription setup, reconnect 
handling.
• Regression tests: known chains with frozen expected forward curves, IV points, and surface 
diagnostics.
===== PAGE 26 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
• Operational tests: CLI jobs run, partitions written, QC reports generated, alerts fired on simulated 
failure.
Reference test cases
Create a small immutable fixture library. It should contain a few liquid chains, a few pathological 
chains, and a few synthetic cases whose correct answers are analytically obvious. These fixtures 
are more valuable than a large number of shallow tests because they allow every release to be 
judged against known good and known bad conditions.
F. End-to-end processing sequence
The sequence below is the recommended canonical run order for one business day. It applies 
both to live production and to replay, with the only difference being the source of events. In 
production, the source is the broker adapter. In replay, the source is the stored raw-event 
partition.
1. Start connectivity service and verify session health.
2. Refresh or validate instrument master for the session date.
3. Launch underlying and option collectors; begin writing immutable raw events.
4. Create normalized market-state snapshots on the configured cadence.
5. Build forward curves by maturity from the latest accepted snapshot.
6. Solve implied volatilities for the filtered option set.
7. Fit and publish surface slices and the cross-maturity grid.
8. Compute model prices and Greeks for all eligible contracts.
9. Join positions and calculate line-level and aggregate risk.
10. Run scenario engine and publish stress summaries.
11. Run QC suite and generate operator dashboard/report.
12. Archive artifacts, close the day, and prepare replay partitions.
G. Pseudocode for key services
Collector service pseudocode
class RawCollector:
    def __init__(self, broker_adapter, writer, clock, config):
        self.adapter = broker_adapter
        self.writer = writer
        self.clock = clock
        self.config = config
    def on_event(self, broker_event):
        normalized = normalize_event(broker_event, receipt_ts=self.clock.now_utc())
        self.writer.append("raw_market_events", normalized)
===== PAGE 27 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
    def run(self):
        self.adapter.connect()
        self.adapter.subscribe_underlyings(self.config.underlyings)
        self.adapter.subscribe_options(self.config.option_universe)
        self.adapter.set_callback(self.on_event)
        self.adapter.heartbeat_loop()
Snapshot builder pseudocode
def build_snapshot(events, snapshot_ts, config):
    state = latest_by_field_before(events, snapshot_ts)
    underlying = build_underlying_state(state, config)
    option_rows = build_option_rows(state, snapshot_ts, config)
    return MarketStateSnapshot(
        snapshot_ts=snapshot_ts,
        underlying_state=underlying,
        option_rows=option_rows,
        flags=derive_state_flags(underlying, option_rows, config),
    )
Forward engine pseudocode
def estimate_forward(snapshot, maturity, rate, config):
    candidates = []
    for strike in eligible_strikes(snapshot, maturity, config):
        call_mid = mid(snapshot.call_quote(strike, maturity))
        put_mid = mid(snapshot.put_quote(strike, maturity))
        if is_usable(call_mid, put_mid):
            f_i = strike + math.exp(rate * maturity.t) * (call_mid - put_mid)
            weight = liquidity_weight(snapshot, strike, maturity, config)
            candidates.append((strike, f_i, weight))
    cleaned = reject_outliers(candidates, method="mad", config=config)
    return weighted_average(cleaned)
Surface engine pseudocode
def fit_surface(iv_points, config):
    slices = []
    for maturity, pts in group_by_maturity(iv_points):
        x = [p.log_moneyness for p in pts]
        y = [p.total_variance for p in pts]
        fit = fit_svi_or_fallback(x, y, config)
        slices.append(fit)
    return interpolate_across_maturities(slices, config)
H. Failure modes and responses
A junior operator must know what to do when the system deviates from nominal behavior. The 
table below intentionally translates technical issues into operational actions.
Failure mode Likely cause Immediate response Longer-term fix
===== PAGE 28 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Collector reconnect 
loop
Gateway session 
expired or network 
instability
Check session 
process, restart 
adapter, confirm 
client ID not 
duplicated
Harden heartbeat, 
improve process 
supervision
Sudden drop in 
eligible quotes
Entitlement issue, 
market closure, or 
stale quotes
Inspect collector 
summary and 
exchange status
Add exchange-
calendar gating and 
stale-data diagnostics
Forward curve 
unstable at one 
maturity
Poor call-put parity 
from illiquid strikes
Inspect candidate 
strikes and QC reason 
codes
Tighten strike 
selection or outlier 
thresholds
Surface fit failure Too few accepted 
points or pathological 
quote set
Publish fail flag and 
retain raw points for 
review
Improve fallback 
interpolation path
Greeks disagree with 
benchmarks
Unit convention drift 
or pricer regression
Run regression suite, 
freeze deployment
Strengthen test 
coverage and 
interface contracts
Scenario results 
missing
Upstream analytics 
incomplete or 
orchestration failure
Check dependency 
graph and rerun 
missing partitions
Add dependency-
aware scheduling and 
alerting
I. Deployment model
The first institutional-grade deployment does not require exotic infrastructure. A modest but 
disciplined architecture is sufficient: one always-on collector process, one scheduler, one 
metadata database, one object or file store, and one monitoring stack. The key is process isolation. 
Keep the broker connectivity service separate from compute-heavy analytics jobs. This minimizes 
the chance that a CPU spike in analytics causes dropped market data.
• Development: local workstation, IBKR paper or non-production session, local file store, local 
scheduler.
• Staging: dedicated VM or small server, production-like configs, replay from stored data, full QC 
and dashboards.
• Production: dedicated collector host, separate analytics host if possible, supervised services, 
alerting, immutable artifact storage.
J. Release management
Every change that can alter economics must have a release artifact. That includes solver 
tolerances, QC thresholds, scenario grids, and smoothing settings. The release should specify what 
changed, why it changed, what tests passed, and which historical periods were revalidated. Never 
deploy a mathematically meaningful change by editing a notebook and rerunning the daily job.
===== PAGE 29 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
• Use semantic versioning or date-based release tags for the analytics package.
• Keep configuration versions separate from code versions.
• Require regression results before promoting a release.
• Log the exact package version and config hashes into every derived table.
Part V — Expanded mathematical notes and engineering guidance
1. Forward-engine design details
The forward-engine implementation should be treated as a first-class analytics product. A 
common mistake is to compute a single parity forward from the apparent ATM strike and move 
on. That is rarely robust enough for production. Instead, the engine should start by defining an 
eligibility band around the estimated money region. Within that band, it should build candidate 
parity forwards per strike, compute liquidity weights, remove outliers, and summarize residuals. 
The final chosen forward should be accompanied by a confidence score derived from the density 
and consistency of the candidate set.
The confidence score is useful operationally because not every maturity is equally informative. 
For example, a maturity with six liquid strikes and tight spreads should produce a high-
confidence forward. A maturity with two sparse strikes and wide spreads should produce a low-
confidence forward and potentially trigger a fallback policy. The fallback policy should be 
explicit: either interpolate from neighboring maturities, borrow the previous trusted snapshot, or 
mark the maturity unusable. The policy chosen should depend on the use case, but the decision 
must be logged.
Equation 25. Mid-price and spread percentage diagnostics
Recommended forward diagnostics
• Candidate count used before and after outlier rejection.
• Median and weighted-mean parity forwards.
• Median absolute deviation of forward candidates.
• Residual of each candidate relative to the chosen forward.
• Forward confidence score and reason code if downgraded.
2. Solver engineering details
The inversion engine should separate economics from numerics. Economics determines the 
admissible price interval and the pricing function. Numerics determine how the root is found. 
This separation is valuable because it allows the same solver skeleton to be reused with different 
pricers. For a European option, the root function is the difference between the model price under 
===== PAGE 30 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Black-style dynamics and the market price. For an American option, the same outer skeleton can 
call a lattice pricer instead.
Use bracketed methods wherever possible for reliability. Newton-type methods can be added as 
accelerators, but only inside a safe bracket. On illiquid or near-intrinsic quotes, pure Newton 
iterations can diverge or run into regions where the Vega collapses, making updates unstable. A 
junior implementer should prioritize a slightly slower but monotone-convergent approach over a 
faster but brittle solver.
• Lower volatility bound should be near zero but not exactly zero if the pricing function becomes 
numerically unstable there.
• Upper bound should be high enough to bracket distressed or event-rich markets but not so high 
that the function loses discrimination.
• Convergence should be measured both in price residual and parameter step size.
• Failed solves should return structured diagnostics, not NaN without context.
3. Surface-calibration guidance
A junior developer should think of calibration as a mapping problem: market points in, 
regularized surface out. The surface is useful only if the mapping is stable. Calibration stability 
depends at least as much on data hygiene as on the chosen model. Therefore, before tuning a 
parameterization, inspect the accepted points, quote density by maturity, and residual 
distribution. In many cases, improvements come from better QC rather than from a more 
complicated surface model.
When using SVI or any parametric family, store both the calibrated parameters and a 
reconstructed grid of total variance values. The parameter vector alone is not enough for 
operations. Operators and downstream services need a directly queryable surface grid, and they 
need diagnostics that compare the raw accepted points to the reconstructed values. The system 
should provide both. In sparse maturities, prefer a conservative fallback that is smooth and 
flagged over an aggressive calibration that produces sharp but unreliable local features.
• Calibrate per maturity slice first; only then handle cross-maturity interpolation.
• Fit in total variance space, not raw volatility, when possible.
• Apply sensible bounds to parameters and log bound hits.
• Keep a fallback nonparametric smoother for sparse slices.
• Always expose fit error metrics and accepted-point counts.
4. Greeks methodology
Greeks should be computed using one canonical methodology per product family. If analytic 
Greeks are available for the chosen pricing model, they should usually serve as the default. If 
finite-difference Greeks are used, the bump sizes must be versioned and documented. A common 
source of hidden error is inconsistent bump sizing across modules, which causes the risk engine 
and scenario engine to disagree for reasons unrelated to economics.
===== PAGE 31 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Finite-difference validation should still exist even when analytic Greeks are used. For a 
regression sample of contracts, compare analytic values with central-difference estimates under 
fixed bumps. The purpose is not to replace analytic formulas but to catch sign errors, unit 
mistakes, and accidental inconsistencies in the implementation.
• Define whether vega is per unit volatility or per one volatility point.
• Define whether theta is expressed per calendar day, trading day, or year fraction.
• Ensure monetized Greeks use the correct contract multiplier and currency.
• Store both raw and monetized sensitivities when useful.
5. Scenario methodology
Scenarios should be treated as explicit market states, not just as Greek multipliers. The best 
practice is to support both full repricing and local approximations. Full repricing is slower but 
more trustworthy and should be the source of truth for the daily scenario report. Local 
approximations are useful for exploratory intraday monitoring and sanity checks. The exact 
scenario grid should be version-controlled and retrievable alongside every scenario result.
A good default scenario family includes: parallel spot moves, parallel implied-volatility shifts, a 
combined spot-and-vol stress, and a small time roll-down for theta-style decay effects. Depending 
on the products covered, the grid may later add skew twists, forward shifts, or rate shocks. Those 
can be layered in without changing the architecture as long as the scenario object model is clean 
from the start.
Part VI — Operational runbooks
Runbook 1 — Start of day
Runbook 1 — Start of day should be written as a checklist that an operator can follow during a 
live session. Below is the minimum recommended content.
1. Verify the scheduler, collector host, and storage endpoints are healthy before market open.
2. Check that the IBKR session is authenticated and receiving heartbeats.
3. Confirm the instrument master for the day has been refreshed or explicitly waived.
4. Confirm that market-data entitlements are active for the monitored products.
5. Open the dashboard and verify zero backlog in the raw-event writer.
6. Run the bootstrap smoke test for one underlying and one option contract.
7. Document any known degraded mode before the session begins.
Runbook 2 — Intraday health monitoring
Runbook 2 — Intraday health monitoring should be written as a checklist that an operator can 
follow during a live session. Below is the minimum recommended content.
1. Watch event-rate dashboards for both underlyings and options.
===== PAGE 32 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
2. Monitor the stale-quote ratio and collector reconnect count.
3. Inspect the latest forward-confidence score distribution.
4. Review solver convergence ratio and fit-error metrics for the active underlyings.
5. Check that the latest scenario report completed on schedule.
6. Escalate if any QC fail persists beyond the configured tolerance window.
Runbook 3 — End of day
Runbook 3 — End of day should be written as a checklist that an operator can follow during a live 
session. Below is the minimum recommended content.
1. Ensure all collector sessions closed cleanly and raw partitions are finalized.
2. Run end-of-day snapshot reconciliation and surface rebuild if required.
3. Publish final risk and scenario reports for the day.
4. Generate and archive the QC report and triage table.
5. Record run identifiers, code version, config hashes, and operator notes.
6. Back up or replicate the day's artifacts according to retention policy.
Runbook 4 — Replay / backfill
Runbook 4 — Replay / backfill should be written as a checklist that an operator can follow during 
a live session. Below is the minimum recommended content.
1. Select the date range and verify raw partitions exist for every date.
2. Pin the code version and configuration version used for replay.
3. Run snapshot rebuild, forward build, IV solve, surface build, risk, and QC in sequence.
4. Write outputs to versioned historical partitions rather than overwriting prior analytics.
5. Compare replay diagnostics with any live outputs available for the same dates.
6. Archive the replay manifest and summary statistics.
Runbook 5 — Incident response
Runbook 5 — Incident response should be written as a checklist that an operator can follow 
during a live session. Below is the minimum recommended content.
1. Acknowledge the alert and identify whether the incident is in connectivity, data, analytics, or 
orchestration.
2. Check the latest healthy heartbeat and the last successful write to each critical table.
3. Collect logs around the failure window using the run and correlation identifiers.
4. Perform the documented restart procedure for the affected service only.
===== PAGE 33 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
5. If data loss is suspected, quarantine downstream jobs until replay or gap-filling can be 
performed.
6. Write a short incident note capturing impact, root cause, remediation, and follow-up actions.
Operator escalation policy
Not every QC warning requires immediate intervention. The escalation policy should distinguish 
between informational warnings, action-required warnings, and hard failures. For example, a 
small rise in fit error may warrant observation, while a collector outage or a missing scenario 
report is a hard failure requiring intervention. Define severity levels up front and map each to an 
expected response time and owner.
• Severity 1: data collection halted or storage unavailable. Immediate intervention required.
• Severity 2: analytics incomplete or QC hard failure on a monitored underlying. Same-session 
intervention required.
• Severity 3: quality degradation within tolerances but trending worse. Investigate and track.
• Severity 4: informational events and low-risk anomalies. Log and review later.
Part VII — Configuration design and example artifacts
Configuration philosophy
Configurations are economic inputs. They should never live as scattered constants in notebooks 
or inside implementation files. Every threshold, bump size, scenario grid, strike-selection rule, 
and cadence should be represented in a versioned configuration artifact. The configuration 
package should support inheritance so that a base institutional configuration can be specialized 
by environment or product family without duplicating the entire tree.
Suggested configuration files
• environment.yaml — storage paths, service endpoints, log levels, scheduler settings.
• broker.yaml — client IDs, reconnect policy, session windows, market-data cadence.
• universe.yaml — monitored underlyings, exchanges, product families, maturity windows.
• qc.yaml — quote filters, stale limits, solver thresholds, fit tolerances.
• scenarios.yaml — named stress scenarios, shifts, combinations, and report subsets.
• pricing.yaml — solver bounds, finite-difference bumps, pricer choices by product family.
Illustrative configuration snippet
# qc.yaml
quote_filters:
  max_spread_pct: 0.25
  max_quote_age_seconds: 60
  min_open_interest: 10
  require_positive_bid: true
===== PAGE 34 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
forward_engine:
  strike_band_mode: nearest_liquid
  max_candidate_count: 12
  outlier_method: mad
  max_robust_zscore: 3.5
iv_solver:
  lower_vol: 0.0001
  upper_vol: 5.0000
  price_tolerance: 1.0e-6
  max_iterations: 100
surface:
  model: svi
  fallback_model: spline
  min_points_per_slice: 5
  max_rmse: 0.02
Part VIII — Acceptance tests by module
Connectivity and access
1. A fresh environment can establish a session and retrieve at least one quote.
2. Heartbeats are observable and reconnects are logged with timestamps.
3. A wrong credential or entitlement failure produces a clear, structured error.
Universe service
1. The active option chain can be reproduced for a fixed as-of date.
2. Duplicate contract records are removed deterministically.
3. Multiplier, currency, expiry, and exchange are populated for every active contract.
Collector service
1. Raw events are written continuously during market hours.
2. Process restart does not corrupt or duplicate records beyond documented idempotency 
behavior.
3. Session summary contains event counts and reconnect counts.
Forward engine
1. Weighted forward estimate is stable under small strike-set perturbations.
2. Outlier candidates are rejected for the documented reason.
3. Diagnostics explain every poor-quality maturity.
===== PAGE 35 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
IV solver
1. Reference contracts converge to expected IVs.
2. Out-of-bounds prices return structured solver failures.
3. Residual and iteration count are stored per solve.
Surface engine
1. Accepted points and fitted values are queryable together.
2. Surface fit parameters are reproducible given the same inputs.
3. Calendar monotonicity diagnostic is computed for all monitored maturities.
Risk and scenarios
1. Portfolio aggregates reconcile to line-level sums.
2. Scenario outputs are reproducible from snapshot, positions, and scenario version.
3. Top contributors can be identified for every worst-case scenario.
Part IX — Data dictionary
instrument_key: Canonical unique key for a tradable contract or underlying.
contract_id_broker: Broker-specific contract identifier as returned by IBKR.
snapshot_ts: Timestamp of the normalized market-state snapshot used by analytics.
exchange_ts: Timestamp associated with the originating market observation when available.
receipt_ts: Timestamp when the event reached the collector.
reference_spot: Chosen underlying reference price used for downstream analytics.
reference_type: Label describing whether reference_spot came from mid, last, close, or fallback.
maturity_years: Year fraction between valuation time and expiry under the chosen day-count 
convention.
forward_price: Chosen forward estimate for a specific maturity.
implied_carry: Carry or dividend-like quantity implied by spot and forward.
log_moneyness: ln(strike / forward_price).
mid_option_price: (bid + ask) / 2 for the accepted option quote.
implied_vol: Volatility solved from price and model assumptions.
total_variance: implied_vol^2 multiplied by maturity_years.
fit_quality_flag: Indicator describing calibration or QC status.
delta: First derivative of price with respect to underlying reference spot.
gamma: Second derivative of price with respect to underlying reference spot.
===== PAGE 36 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
vega: Derivative of price with respect to volatility under the chosen unit convention.
theta: Derivative of price with respect to time under the chosen convention.
dollar_gamma: Gamma monetized by spot squared and multiplier.
scenario_id: Versioned identifier of a defined stress scenario.
scenario_pnl: Portfolio or line-level revaluation under scenario_id.
qc_status: Pass/warn/fail classification for a named validation check.
Part X — Glossary
Canonical key: The internally defined identifier that uniquely names an instrument 
independently of any one vendor or broker session.
Carry: A generic term covering financing and distribution effects that cause forward to differ 
from spot.
Confidence score: A quality label or numeric score indicating how trustworthy a derived 
estimate is.
Derived analytics: Any object computed from raw observations, such as forwards, IV points, 
surfaces, Greeks, or scenarios.
Immutable raw layer: The append-only storage layer containing normalized observations 
exactly as captured or reconstructed.
Market-state snapshot: A time-aligned, deterministic view of underlying and option quotes used 
by analytics modules.
No-arbitrage diagnostic: A check designed to flag surface shapes that are economically 
implausible or inconsistent.
Replay: The process of recomputing analytics historically from stored raw data or snapshots 
using the same code path as live processing.
Scenario version: A named, version-controlled set of stress definitions used to compute scenario 
PnL.
Surface grid: A regularized table of volatility or total-variance values sampled from the fitted 
surface representation.
Part XI — Junior handover checklist
The final section is intentionally practical. A junior implementer or operator should be able to 
check off each item and demonstrate competence without needing any hidden context about the 
strategy that will eventually consume the analytics.
1. Can explain the difference between raw events, snapshots, and derived analytics.
2. Can run the connectivity smoke test and interpret failures.
===== PAGE 37 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
3. Can refresh the instrument master and inspect a discovered option chain.
4. Can locate the latest raw partition and the latest surface partition for a chosen underlying.
5. Can explain how the forward for one maturity was chosen and where the diagnostics are 
stored.
6. Can rerun the IV solver for one contract from a saved snapshot.
7. Can plot accepted IV points and fitted surface slice for one maturity.
8. Can interpret line-level Greeks and aggregate risk tables.
9. Can run the scenario report and identify the worst-case scenario and contributors.
10. Can read the QC report and navigate to the triage table for a failed maturity.
11. Can restart a failed collector without corrupting the raw store.
12. Can launch a historical replay for a chosen date range and compare outputs with prior 
versions.
Part XII — File-by-file implementation guide
connectivity/session.py
Responsibility. Own connection lifecycle to TWS or IB Gateway. Expose connect(), disconnect(), 
is_healthy(), and heartbeat_loop(). Maintain a small state machine: DISCONNECTED, 
CONNECTING, CONNECTED, DEGRADED, RECONNECTING. The module should not know anything 
about volatility mathematics. Its only job is to provide a reliable transport for broker interactions.
• Implement exponential backoff with jitter for reconnects.
• Emit structured logs on every state transition.
• Prevent duplicate client IDs by configuration validation at startup.
• Expose a heartbeat timestamp and age metric.
• Refuse to claim health until at least one successful broker round-trip has completed.
universe/contracts.py
Responsibility. Resolve and normalize instruments. This file should provide the canonical 
dataclasses for underlyings and option contracts, plus serializer helpers. It should also define 
how instrument keys are constructed and parsed.
• Treat expiry, strike, right, exchange, currency, multiplier, and broker contract ID as separate 
fields.
• Add a method that round-trips from key string back into object form.
• Keep raw broker payloads in an adjacent storage layer for audit.
• Validate strike type conversion carefully to avoid integer/float drift.
===== PAGE 38 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
• Add explicit tests for duplicate chain entries and missing multipliers.
collectors/raw_writer.py
Responsibility. Persist normalized events quickly and safely. This module should not perform 
economics or analytics. It should batch writes where appropriate, flush on controlled intervals, 
and tag every write with collector session metadata.
• Use append-only semantics.
• Validate the schema before write, not after.
• Handle disk or object-store failures by surfacing a hard alert.
• Add per-partition write counters for operational reporting.
• Never silently drop malformed events; quarantine them with a reason code.
snapshots/builder.py
Responsibility. Convert raw events into deterministic market-state snapshots. This module should 
define field precedence, quote-age limits, fallback logic, and the exact assembly of snapshot 
objects.
• Write pure functions for latest_by_field, choose_reference_spot, and build_option_row.
• Include state flags in the output object rather than relying on logs alone.
• Keep the builder deterministic by sorting events explicitly.
• Version the cadence and staleness thresholds via configuration.
• Provide a debug mode that prints the exact raw events chosen for one contract.
forwards/engine.py
Responsibility. Build the forward curve and implied carry diagnostics. This file should contain 
candidate generation, weighting, outlier rejection, smoothing, and confidence-scoring logic.
• Separate candidate construction from candidate selection.
• Keep every intermediate candidate row for audit.
• Add a minimum candidate-count threshold before accepting a forward.
• Expose both weighted mean and median diagnostics.
• Include a fallback policy object rather than hard-coding the fallback.
iv/solver.py
Responsibility. Price-to-vol inversion. The module should expose scalar and vectorized solve 
functions plus structured diagnostics objects. All convergence decisions should be explicit and 
tested.
• Use a bracketed solver as the primary safe path.
• Return diagnostics objects even on success.
===== PAGE 39 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
• Document exactly which pricing model is assumed for each product family.
• Implement intrinsic and upper-bound checks before entering the root finder.
• Make the scalar path maximally readable and cover it with tests.
surfaces/calibration.py
Responsibility. Fit surface slices and produce a regularized grid. The module should not fetch 
data itself. It should consume accepted IV points and emit parameters plus diagnostics.
• Persist raw points, accepted points, rejected points, fit parameters, and reconstructed grid values.
• Bound parameters and log bound hits.
• Compute RMSE and max error by slice.
• Support at least one fallback method for sparse slices.
• Add plotting helpers for operations and regression review.
pricing/european.py and pricing/american.py
Responsibility. Canonical pricing functions and Greeks. These files form the trusted pricing 
library for the platform. All downstream analytics should call these files rather than 
reimplementing formulas elsewhere.
• Expose typed inputs and outputs.
• Keep unit conventions explicit in docstrings.
• Provide benchmark fixtures covering limiting cases.
• Separate pure pricing from vectorization wrappers.
• Test consistency between price and numerical derivatives.
risk/aggregation.py
Responsibility. Merge positions with analytics results and produce line-level and aggregate 
sensitivities. The module should support grouping by any configured key such as underlying, 
maturity bucket, or desk category.
• Preserve line-level outputs for audit.
• Add currency handling if multiple currencies are present.
• Keep aggregate formulas transparent and queryable.
• Reconcile to broker Greeks only as diagnostics, never as the source of truth.
• Version the risk snapshot with analytics version and position source timestamp.
risk/scenarios.py
Responsibility. Reprice portfolios under named scenarios. The module should support both full 
repricing and local approximations and expose contributor analysis.
• Define a typed Scenario object.
===== PAGE 40 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
• Store every scenario with version and parameters.
• Allow scenario families to be filtered by report type.
• Separate scenario generation from scenario execution.
• Include top-contributor extraction in the core API.
qc/checks.py
Responsibility. Implement validation checks as named reusable functions. Each check returns a 
measured value, a status, and supporting context.
• Keep thresholds in config, not in code.
• Assign stable reason codes to every fail path.
• Write summary and detail outputs separately.
• Track historical distributions of QC measures for trend analysis.
• Document operator meaning for each check in the module README.
orchestration/jobs.py
Responsibility. Provide entry points for scheduled jobs. Jobs should be thin wrappers that 
orchestrate library calls, write manifests, and emit metrics.
• Use dependency ordering so downstream jobs do not run on incomplete upstream data.
• Write one manifest per job with parameters, versions, and outputs.
• Ensure reruns are idempotent or explicitly versioned.
• Surface clear exit codes for the scheduler.
• Add dry-run modes for operational safety.
Part XIII — Extended appendices
Appendix A — Detailed formulas and implementation comments
Reference spot
The chosen spot should be the result of a deterministic selection rule applied to underlying 
quotes. Store the chosen reference plus a type flag and all candidate fields used to choose it.
Forward parity
The parity forward is an empirical estimate from market quotes. Because market quotes are 
noisy, store strike-level forward candidates before smoothing or weighting.
Carry identity
The spot-forward-carry identity is valuable both for diagnostics and for plugging into product-
specific pricers. The developer should document the day-count basis used for T.
===== PAGE 41 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Total variance
Surface interpolation should prefer total variance because many cross-maturity pathologies 
become easier to see in variance space than in raw volatility space.
Greek PnL approximation
The local approximation is a diagnostic convenience, not a replacement for full repricing under 
large shocks. The scenario engine should therefore support both.

===== PAGE 42 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Appendix B — Sample daily manifest
{
  "run_id": "2026-04-06_eod_001",
  "environment": "production",
  "code_version": "vol-infra-4.0.0",
  "config_hashes": {
    "universe": "u_8d6...",
    "qc": "q_34b...",
    "pricing": "p_c21...",
    "scenarios": "s_55a..."
  },
  "input_partitions": {
    "raw_market_events": "dt=2026-04-06",
    "positions": "ts=2026-04-06T21:00:00Z"
===== PAGE 43 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
  },
  "output_partitions": {
    "market_state_snapshots": "dt=2026-04-06",
    "forward_curve": "dt=2026-04-06",
    "iv_points": "dt=2026-04-06",
    "surface_parameters": "dt=2026-04-06",
    "risk_aggregates": "dt=2026-04-06",
    "scenario_results": "dt=2026-04-06",
    "qc_results": "dt=2026-04-06"
  },
  "status": "success"
}
Appendix C — Suggested documentation pack
• architecture_overview.pdf — system diagram, data flow, service boundaries, and environment 
map.
• environment.md — exact setup steps, secrets model, bootstrap smoke test.
• operating_runbooks.md — start-of-day, intraday, end-of-day, replay, incident response.
• schemas.md — all table definitions with field descriptions and partitioning rules.
• module_READMEs/ — one README per major package explaining public APIs and failure modes.
• release_checklist.md — regression expectations, approvals, rollback plan.
• known_limitations.md — current compromises, unresolved issues, planned enhancements.
Appendix D — Review questions for a junior engineer
1. Explain why the forward curve must be built before log-moneyness and surface fitting.
2. Explain the difference between a raw market event and a market-state snapshot.
3. Explain why a filtered quote set must preserve rejected-quote diagnostics.
4. Explain why deterministic replay is important for regression testing.
5. Explain why the platform stores both fitted surface parameters and reconstructed grid values.
6. Explain the difference between a QC warning and a hard QC failure.
7. Explain the difference between broker-returned Greeks and platform-native Greeks.
8. Explain why scenario definitions must be version-controlled.
Part XIV — Service-level objectives, monitoring, and operational metrics
An institutional-grade platform should define service-level objectives even if the first deployment 
is modest in scale. The point is to make expectations explicit. Without SLOs, the team cannot 
distinguish between acceptable degradation and unacceptable operational failure. The SLOs 
below are representative and should be tuned to the actual business context, but the habit of 
defining them should exist from the first release.
===== PAGE 44 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Service Key metric Suggested target Operator action if 
missed
Connectivity Heartbeat age < 30 seconds during 
session
Investigate gateway, 
session auth, network
Collector Raw-event write lag < 5 seconds median Check writer backlog 
and storage endpoint
Snapshots Latest snapshot 
freshness
< configured cadence 
+ tolerance
Inspect snapshot job 
and raw-event 
completeness
Forward engine Maturity coverage 
ratio
> 95% of monitored 
maturities
Inspect quote QC and 
parity diagnostics
IV solver Convergence ratio > 97% on accepted 
quotes
Review solver 
residuals and quote 
quality
Surface engine Completed monitored 
surfaces
> 95% on monitored 
underlyings
Inspect sparse 
maturities and 
fallback path
Scenario engine Report completion 
before cut-off
100% Check dependency 
graph and runtime 
bottlenecks
QC framework QC report publication 100% daily Investigate failed 
checks or 
orchestration issues
Recommended metrics catalog
• Collector metrics: raw events per second, reconnect count, heartbeat age, write lag, malformed-
event count.
• Snapshot metrics: snapshots produced, stale-underlying ratio, stale-option ratio, fallback-spot 
ratio.
• Forward metrics: candidate count per maturity, confidence score distribution, outlier rejection 
rate.
• IV metrics: solve count, convergence ratio, median iterations, residual distribution, bounds-hit 
count.
• Surface metrics: accepted-point count, fit RMSE distribution, fallback-fit frequency, calendar-check 
failures.
• Risk metrics: aggregate delta, gamma, vega, theta by portfolio and by underlying, timestamp age.
• Scenario metrics: scenario runtime, result count, worst-case loss, top-contributor concentration.
===== PAGE 45 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
• QC metrics: check pass/warn/fail counts, unresolved triage count, repeat-failure counts by 
underlying.
Dashboard design
The operator dashboard should have three layers. The first layer is system health: are services 
running, is data flowing, are tables being written. The second layer is analytics health: are 
forwards stable, are IVs converging, are surfaces fitting. The third layer is risk/report health: are 
the latest risk and scenario reports current and complete. Do not overload the front page with too 
many charts. The dashboard should answer the operational questions in under one minute.
Part XV — Data retention, lineage, and governance
Even a privately operated volatility platform benefits from governance discipline. The most 
important governance principle is lineage: every derived object should point back to the raw 
observations, code version, and configuration version that produced it. The second principle is 
retention: store enough history to support audit, debugging, and replay, but define clear retention 
tiers so storage costs and operational complexity remain controlled.
Retention tiers
• Tier 1 — Raw events: highest fidelity; long enough retention to support replay and forensic 
debugging.
• Tier 2 — Normalized snapshots: retained longer than raw if storage requires compromise, because 
they are compact and analytically rich.
• Tier 3 — Derived analytics: forwards, IV points, surfaces, risk, and scenarios; retained for long-
horizon trend analysis and audit.
• Tier 4 — Summary reports and manifests: retained indefinitely or near-indefinitely because they 
are small and operationally valuable.
Lineage requirements
• Every derived record must include source snapshot_ts and source data partition identifiers.
• Every job must emit a manifest with code version and config hashes.
• Any replay or backfill must write a new version identifier instead of silently mutating past results.
• QC outputs should reference both the failing object and the run that generated the object.
Change-control categories
Not all changes carry the same risk. The team should classify changes into at least three 
categories. Category A changes alter economics directly, such as pricer logic, solver bounds, 
surface parameterization, or scenario definitions. Category B changes alter validation or 
operational behavior, such as thresholds, alert policies, or run schedules. Category C changes are 
non-economic, such as log-message improvements or documentation fixes. Category A changes 
should require the strongest regression evidence and the most explicit sign-off.
===== PAGE 46 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Part XVI — Extended test matrix
A production handover is much stronger when the tests are presented as a matrix rather than as 
a loose list. The matrix below is not exhaustive, but it shows how to think about coverage across 
module type, data condition, and expected outcome.
Module Condition Test input Expected result Priority
Spot builder Normal market Tight underlying 
bid/ask
Reference type = 
mid; spread 
diagnostics valid
High
Spot builder Wide market Bid/ask spread 
beyond 
threshold
Fallback 
triggered and 
labeled
High
Forward engine Liquid maturity Multiple near-
money call/put 
pairs
Stable weighted 
forward with 
high confidence
High
Forward engine Sparse maturity Two poor-quality 
pairs only
Low-confidence 
or rejected 
maturity
High
IV solver Normal quote Tradable mid in 
no-arbitrage 
bounds
Converged 
implied vol with 
diagnostics
High
IV solver Bad quote Price below 
intrinsic value
Structured 
failure, no silent 
NaN
High
Surface engine Dense slice Many accepted 
points
Stable fit with 
low RMSE
High
Surface engine Sparse slice Few accepted 
points
Fallback fit or 
fail flag per 
policy
High
Pricing engine Degenerate 
American case
No early-exercise 
value expected
American and 
European prices 
close
Medium
Risk aggregation Multiple 
positions
Known synthetic 
book
Aggregates 
reconcile to line 
items
High
Scenario engine Configured grid Frozen snapshot 
and positions
Scenario count 
complete and 
deterministic
High
===== PAGE 47 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Replay pipeline Historical day Stored raw 
partitions
Replay equals 
same-code live 
logic
High
Regression-candidate dataset design
Create a curated library of replay days. The library should include calm days, event-heavy days, 
days with sparse liquidity, and days containing known operational incidents such as brief 
disconnects. Each replay day becomes a standard challenge set for new releases. This is one of the 
highest-leverage investments the team can make because it prevents regressions from hiding 
behind good behavior on only one benign day.
Part XVII — Extended coding examples
Dataclass pattern for analytics objects
from dataclasses import dataclass
from typing import Optional, List
@dataclass(frozen=True)
class ForwardCandidate:
    strike: float
    maturity_years: float
    call_mid: float
    put_mid: float
    forward_estimate: float
    weight: float
    quality_flag: str
@dataclass(frozen=True)
class ForwardResult:
    underlying: str
    snapshot_ts: str
    maturity_years: float
    chosen_forward: float
    confidence_score: float
    candidates: List[ForwardCandidate]
    diagnostics_version: str
Result-object pattern for solver diagnostics
@dataclass(frozen=True)
class IvSolveResult:
    contract_key: str
    snapshot_ts: str
    market_price: float
    implied_vol: Optional[float]
    converged: bool
    iterations: int
    residual: float
    lower_bound: float
===== PAGE 48 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
    upper_bound: float
    failure_reason: Optional[str]
    model_name: str
    model_version: str
Scenario object pattern
@dataclass(frozen=True)
class Scenario:
    scenario_id: str
    spot_shift_pct: float
    vol_shift_abs: float
    time_roll_days: int
    description: str
    version: str
CLI entry point pattern
def main():
    args = parse_args()
    cfg = load_config(args.config_path)
    run = JobRunContext.from_args(args, cfg)
    logger = build_logger(run)
    snapshots = load_snapshots(run)
    forwards = build_forwards(snapshots, cfg, logger)
    iv_points = solve_chain_iv(snapshots, forwards, cfg, logger)
    surfaces = build_surfaces(iv_points, cfg, logger)
    write_outputs(run, forwards, iv_points, surfaces)
    publish_manifest(run)
Part XVIII — Frequently misunderstood implementation points
Why not compute analytics directly inside the broker callback?
Because callbacks should be short and loss-tolerant. Heavy analytics inside callbacks increase the 
probability of dropped events and make historical replay impossible to align with live logic.
Why keep rejected quotes?
Because rejected quotes are evidence. QC threshold tuning and operational debugging depend on 
understanding what was excluded and why.
Why version configurations separately from code?
Because a threshold or scenario-grid change can alter economics without any code edit. Separate 
versioning preserves lineage.
===== PAGE 49 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
Why store both fitted parameters and grid values?
Because parameters are concise but not directly convenient for every downstream consumer. 
Grid values are easy to inspect, plot, and join to risk code.
Why insist on replaying with the same code path as live?
Because dual paths drift. If historical and live analytics differ by implementation path, 
regressions become impossible to reason about.
Why treat forwards as first-class outputs rather than internal intermediates?
Because forward quality drives moneyness, IV, surface shape, and risk. Hiding forward 
diagnostics deprives the platform of one of its most informative health measures.
Part XIX — Final implementation reminders
The purpose of this final section is to prevent a junior engineer from taking common shortcuts 
that appear harmless but later make the platform unreliable. The project should be treated as a 
product with users, audits, and operational obligations. Every shortcut that erodes determinism 
or lineage is therefore costly, even if it appears to save time in the first week of implementation.
• Do not compute a forward, implied volatility, or Greek in an exploratory notebook and then copy 
the formula into production later. Production logic should be implemented in a tested library first 
and used by notebooks second.
• Do not overwrite historical analytics partitions without writing a new version identifier. 
Reproducibility requires visible history.
• Do not hide fallback behavior. If the system used last price instead of mid, or interpolated a 
missing maturity, that fact must be queryable.
• Do not allow the collector to perform expensive CPU-bound work. Separate ingestion from 
analytics.
• Do not merge strategy-specific assumptions into generic platform code. Keep the infrastructure 
reusable and opaque with respect to trading intent.
• Do not sign off on a release without replaying at least one calm day and one stressed day from the 
regression library.
Appendix E — Canonical field mapping checklist
The table below is intended as an implementation checklist during schema design and code 
review. Every row should exist somewhere in the codebase, with a single authoritative definition. 
This appendix exists because field ambiguity is one of the most persistent causes of downstream 
confusion in risk systems.
Field Layer Type Implementation note
event_id raw string Unique within 
===== PAGE 50 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
collector session; 
never recycled
collector_session_id raw string Connects raw events 
to a collector run 
summary
instrument_key all string Canonical key used 
across all tables
contract_id_broker master/raw string Foreign key to 
broker-specific 
representation
field_name raw string Name of observed 
field such as bid, ask, 
last, gamma
field_value raw numeric/string Typed at 
normalization 
boundary
receipt_ts raw timestamp UTC time when 
collector received the 
event
canonical_ts snapshot timestamp Time used to align a 
snapshot
reference_spot snapshot numeric Chosen spot used by 
downstream analytics
reference_type snapshot string mid / last / close / 
fallback
quote_age_seconds snapshot numeric Age of quote at 
snapshot time
mid_option_price snapshot numeric Computed from bid 
and ask when eligible
forward_price forward numeric Chosen forward per 
maturity
forward_confidence forward numeric Quality score from 
candidate diagnostics
implied_vol iv_points numeric Solved volatility
solver_converged iv_points bool True only if 
convergence criteria 
===== PAGE 51 =====
Industrial Roadmap for a Volatility Infrastructure Platform
IBKR-based volatility infrastructure blueprint
met
surface_model surface string SVI, spline, or other 
configured method
fit_rmse surface numeric Fit error for slice or 
surface
greek_delta risk numeric Canonical delta
greek_gamma risk numeric Canonical gamma
greek_vega risk numeric Canonical vega
dollar_gamma risk numeric Monetized gamma 
using multiplier
scenario_id scenario string Versioned scenario 
key
scenario_pnl scenario numeric Repriced PnL under 
scenario
qc_status qc string pass / warn / fail
reason_code qc string Stable diagnostic 
reason code